Below is my definition of bloatware.
Bloatware applications consume storage space, processing power and battery life while providing little or no value to many users. Types of bloatware include:
- Multiple, installed apps that perform the same task (e.g. Galaxy Store, have you ever downloaded an app other than Samsung apps from the Galaxy Store?)
- Free trials of paid services such as cloud storage, music or video streaming, security software, office software, etc. (e.g. YouTube Premium or Spotify. YT Premium free for x months when you buy our phone!!! WOW! We've added a few dollars to the price of the phone so you'll choose our stupid phone just for a trial for a few months)
- Apps that display advertisements or collect personal information (e.g. MIUI. Aren't you annoyed by the ads that pop up in the app security scan every time you download an app.)
- Promotional apps that only serve to advertise services, products or content (No, thanks! I don't want to install Candy Crush or PUBG on my new phone just because of your sponsor).
- Apps created by operators and device manufacturers solely to promote their content and services (I currently have 3 old Samsung phones, two of which are used by my parents. I get notifications of the products being promoted at every Samsung event. Seriously Samsung, why send ads to devices you've already cut support for).
- News apps, travel apps and other content apps that are filled exclusively with promotional material from advertisers and sponsors (I can follow the news sites I want myself. You don't get to decide where I get my news from. Much better to use RSS to follow the news nowadays).
- Adware and other apps that primarily display ads to generate revenue, often collecting personal information in the process (Every time I reset my MIUI, a few games download. The games are usually of poor quality and show a lot of ads. My first step is to install Adaway and delete these apps).
- Apps with poor performance, lots of bugs, outdated software, insecure code and few updates that degrade the overall user experience (especially on older phones, when apps like WhatsApp and Chrome change their design, it's a very funny situation between the other interfaces of the phone).
- Pre-installed social networks, messaging apps, navigation apps, fitness trackers and other apps that users can't delete if they choose to use alternative options (e.g. Facebook. They want to be installed on every new phone we buy so as not to lose their user base. They also install a secret system app I forget the name of, like Facebook Update Service, pretending there is no Google Play Store for updates).
